US Secretary of State Anthony blinkin is
heading to the Middle East again for
what will be his fourth visit to the
region since Hamas launched a largescale
terrorist attack on Israel on October
the 7th last year since then Israel has
taken the war to Hamas in Gaza in
response The Fallout from that war
continues to threaten a wider conflict
in the region Israel said on Monday it
was regrouping its forces in Gaza and
will change the way it's fighting Hamas
which is seen as a terrorist
organization by the US the EU and many
others in statements toward the end of
last year the US called on Israel to do
more to prevent civilian casualties in
Gaza according to Hamas controlled
authorities there the war has now killed
more than
22,000
people but the first statement from the
White House in the New Year show
continued support for Israel's war goals
in Gaza the destruction of Hamas mil
militarily being high on that list
here's National Security Council
spokesman John Kirby we have estimates
I'm Lo to put the numbers out there
right now because they are just
estimates uh but uh but Hamas still has
a significant Force posture inside Gaza
we believe that it is absolutely an
attainable goal for the Israeli military
forces to uh to degrade and and defeat
hamas's ability ities to conduct attacks
inside Israel they they can it can be
done militarily are you going to
eliminate the ideology no um and are you
likely going to uh erase the group uh
from existence probably not but can you
eliminate the threat that Hamas poses to
the Israeli people absolutely and
joining me now is Shalom lipner he
worked for seven consecutive Israeli
Prime Ministers between 1990 and 2016
and he's currently with the Atlantic
Council and joins us from Jerusalem
welcome
to the day now the US has questioned
Israeli tactics in Gaza but would Israel
have been able to use the force it has
without the backing of the US in the
first
place it's good to be with Gart tonight
um initially I think that you know the
the IDF rebounded after the atrocities
of October 7 you know fell back on a
much better footing than it had
initially when it was caught by surprise
but I think later it's um it would have
been very difficult close to impossible
for Israel to have mounted the effort
that we've seen in Gaza without the you
know the close assistance of the United
States we've seen over 200 planes of
Munitions coming to to restock Israeli
arsenals we've seen the uh support the
United States has provided on the
security Council to to push back against
resolutions that have called for an
immediate ceasefire so I think um you
know it's pretty clear right now that uh
you know that right now the United
States and Israel are closely aligned at
least as far as the campaign is
concerned and then the goal of defeating
kasas which of course the United States
and much of Europe which has defined
Hamas as a terrorist organization you
know would see that as a shared interest
of all those parties now Israel says
it's changing its tactics now with the
reduction of troops uh that are actually
in Gaza uh and a shift to tactics which
should reduce civilian casualties among
Palestinians has that shift come in time
to prevent President Biden from
rethinking his approach to support for
Israel
well I mean those those channels of
communication are open on a constant
basis it would appear so um I think
we've seen um you know we've seen
comments coming out of Washington
suggesting that Israel has been
receptive to their concerns as you say
the the deployment has moved into a to
the next phase as they've defined it now
um you know that many of the reservists
are being rotated out and um Israel is
moving to more Precision um operations
within within the Gaza Strip obviously
American concerns that were voiced on
the issue of um trying to keep
non-combatants you know keep them away
from the fighting to increase civilian
Aid um were heard by Israel as well you
know there was some push back
about the extent to which you know that
could happen in a war zone and obviously
you know concerns that if if the eight
tap was open too far that could actually
help actually sustain Kamas in power but
I think that you know those concerns are
being are being heard here and I think
it's probably safe to say that the
United States is should always say
relieved that you know that Israel is
moving on to this to this next phase of
The Campaign which hopefully will be a
little more uh yeah yeah let's let's
look into the future a bit can and
should Israel formulate what kind of
deal it wants with the Palestinians
after this war is
over well we've seen a lot of resistance
shall we say to having discussions in
Israel and with you know with Israel's
Partners about the proverbial day after
actually tonight the security cabinet I
think and the and the war cabinet both
cabinets will be meeting to actually
have that an inal discussion or at least
one that they've that they've publicized
um I mean it would be virtually
inconceivable certainly in terms of
Israel's planning and and you know its
partners that are on side that that
conversation would not happen I think
that you know there's a there's
definitely a need for Israel to start
talking about not only what it doesn't
want in terms of the future of Gaza but
you know what it would countenance on
the ground what kind of arrangements it
does see moving forward to be able to to
maintain stability and Security in that
area I think that if they were not doing
that it would create a dangerous vacuum
that you know that nobody would want to
see and you know could end us take us
places nobody wants to go I'm sure that
those you know those off will take up
Factor prominently in Secretary blink's
talks when he visits Israel next week
now let's take a quick look at
personalities here President Biden has
been a staunch supporter of Israel as
Israel could wish for over the course of
his career but can Israel rely on such
strong backing from us politicians in
the long
term president bid remarkable Ally for
Israel um you know as you say we were
talking earlier but pushing back against
calls for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza
right now which have been brought some
price to the security Council I mean
that would leave over 150 gas hostages
Gaza it would leave SAS in power in Gaza
you know amid promises that they've made
or pledges to repeat the events of
October 7th until you know Israel were
destroyed so so um you know so that
that's been hugely important to Israel I
think it's even more extraordinary under
the political circumstance given the
political circumstances in which we
operate I mean President Biden is on the
C for in the middle of a 22 a 2024
election campaign um his Israel policy
is not all that popular within certain
quarters of his party um you know so he
had to do this on force of of conscience
and on for you know his belief that this
is the right thing for the United States
um even when there's been push back so
you know I don't think that um I don't
think Israel can be certain that any
successor in his chair would uh you know
would maintain the level of support that
that Israel has seen from him on a
personal level now let's talk about
Benjamin Netanyahu he is a divisive
figure in Israel to the J judicial
reforms are case in point if Israel
needs to focus more on National Security
in the future than Politics as you have
written can it do that with
Netanyahu that's a hugely important
question um I think that uh you know the
unity Unity of purpose that we've seen
in Israel during this campaign um is
under threat as you say again from sort
of partisan winds um judicial reform
elements of the reform are back on the
table again there were a couple of
Supreme Court rulings this week which
forced that back into of the frame um
we've had disput budgeting priorities
with you know sort of patronage issues
being fed into the budget at the time
when isra was trying to fund an
expensive War so you know there are a
lot of questions about whether or not
Israel is capable of doing that um
clearly as long as it does not get a
handle on that problem and does not
prioritize National Security over these
political issues I think that you know
it uh it risks undermining the
solidarity that will allow for this
campaign to continue um I think it would
probably also draw into question the
sustainability of this government
Coalition over time um and you know at a
time when you say there's divisiveness
in Israel and and you know people will
not not be willing to uh to Rally to the
flag under circumstances such as those
now if we're looking at Israel's uh deep
alliance with the US that it still
currently has which could of course
change depending uh who is at the top
there in the US does Israel really have
any alternative
to this this friendship this support uh
with and from the United
States sure not really I would argue and
and you know the article we referred
that I just written last week I think
that you know whereas we've seen other
parties in the Middle East maybe hedging
their Bets with the Russians or with the
Chinese I don't I don't think that's
really a viable option for Israel um you
know Beijing and Moscow have been
supportive of Hamas they've been pushing
back against you know Israel's
priorities in the security Council they
certainly would not be delivering the
levels of aid which you know Israel has
enjoyed has received from the United
States that allowed this campaign to
continue so I I mean for the time for
the time being for the foreseeable
future I don't think that you know
Israel has another viable option to its
alliance with the United States now US
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin is
heading to the Middle East again within
the next few hours it's his fourth trip
since Hamas launched a large-scale
terror attack on Israel DW correspondent
Benjamin Alvarez Gruber is in Washington
and follows this story for us Benjamin
what does blink can hope to achieve this
time there will be several stops here
but what's more interesting than the
countries that he's visiting so he's
visiting a lot of allies lot of actors
in the region we have Turkey Greece
Jordan Qatar United Arab Emirates Saudi
Arabia of course Israel the West Bank
and also Egypt is the fact that he's now
going to Lebanon we're just spoking
about that the fears that the
assassination of the Hamas leader might
lead to a broader confrontation so it's
interesting that he's not going there
today there was a briefing of the state
department the spokesperson said that
there are several issues on the agenda
that they expect also to have tough
calls with many of his other
counterparts they will speak about how
to get more Aid humanitarian Aid into
Gaza they will speak about the hostages
also what will happen after the war so
there will be several talks here on the
agenda for because for blinkin also the
criticism here in Washington is
increasing with more um people saying
and more politicians here saying that
the US needs to put real red lines and
not just putting out statements saying
that they are deeply concerned but
actually putting more red lines for
example for weapons exports for Israel
now about the future of the Gaza Strip
uh the the state department has harshly
criticized the two Israeli ministers uh
for calling uh Palestinians to leave
Gaza uh do you think that he will
reinforce that
message
that's what the spokesperson said today
we had this press release only a few
days ago criticizing exactly the
statements of the two Israeli ministers
that you said the US state department
said that there are disagreements
between Israel and the United States and
also that the US rejected the
inflammatory and irresponsible
statements from the government so that
will be definitely something that
they'll talk to with their Israeli
counterparts to see how to go further we
have to remember that the US is right
now bypassing Congress to get weapons to
Israel that's something also that is
Raising concerns here so he will be sure
to press that also with Israel and also
with the other partners there but we
know that the US is is not happy with
the way that this is developing and they
will have harsh words with the Israeli
counterparts of what the States
Department spokesperson said earlier
today now blink will also be in the West
Bank to talk to the Palestinian
Authority what will be his message
there he he met Mahmud abas the
president of the Palestinian autonomic
um of of the Palestinian authorities
there he met him in November a they
spoke about violence against settlers in
the West Bank and also that it's
important for them to reassure that the
US remains committed to advancing tank
double steps for a Palestinian State and
that's something that the US has
repeatedly said that Gaza is Palestinian
will remain Palestinian and that's
something that he will need to talk to
not only with Israeli politicians but
also with Palestinian authorities that
you will meet in the West Bank Benjamin
Alvar grba there for us in Washington
thank you
Benjamin